Meeting the stars of the R-Universe,
meeting the PEcAn project with Rob Kooper,
Chris Black, Eric Scott,
Michael Dietze, and David LeBauer
PEcAn is kind of a, a model data informatics system.
So it's a set of tools to make it easier to bring process-based models
together with, data,
with a particular focus on ecological models. We've spent a lot of time,
thinking about the terrestrial carbon cycle and,
and those sorts of process-based models and how to connect those with a wide
range of different, types of data.
And so some of our modules are about data ingest, so getting,
meteorological data into models, vegetation data,
soils data, remotely sense data.
So there's a lot of pipeline in some of the packages,
there's a lot of tools.
So there's packages for model calibration and model validation
and sensitivity and uncertainty analyses and data simulation and stuff like
that.
there's some specific tools we're dealing with specific types of data.
So there's a tool for so photosynthetic data and a lot elementary data and,
radio transfer data. And then there's,
kind of one package for each of the 20 plus models,
that we've coupled too so far. So it ends up being a whole kind of,
ecosystem of interacting R packages.
So the team, I mean, the core team,
Mike and I started it back when I was his postdoc,
back in 2009 or so quickly met Rob, and,
he was a computer scientist I think, who kind of helped us look at this in,
you know, more than just a bunch of scripts and, you know,
eventually breaking into a bunch of, in, into different packages.
So he's been working on this project since almost the beginning.
There's a few other scientists,
people like Eric and and Chris are really core contributors.
And then there have been a number of,
of postdocs and graduate students who have contributed along the way as they
kind of work on, on their area. But,
so I, I think there's maybe, three of us, Mike, Rob,
and I, who are able to merge into the master branch, although,
Rob usually does that and maybe just the same of us who can merge into the
development branch. But we have a lot of people who,
who contribute, a few people review, and once,
a pull request has been reviewed, we can be merged in.
And we also have a lot of, maybe not enough tests, but a lot of tests,
enough to break, intermittently and,
that, you know, automatically, check that, you know,
do a lot of checks and,
so that we have some confidence that at least the features that we like enough
to keep, or and test, are still gonna be there.
I guess I'll add that, that, you can often map,
specific modules or well modules mapped our packages,
but you can map those often to individual dissertations or,
or posdocs or,
or sub clusters of folks that are working collaboratively on
a specific project. So, like right now, Shawn Serbin, who's not on the call,
but who's a research scientist at Brookhaven National Lab, Shawn and I have a,
a NASA carbon monitoring project that uses the data simulation system heavily.
So like the current work on the data simulation module is dominated by my two
students in his postdoc to, you know, conduct a specific project.
But one of our design philosophies is like, you know, rather than,
you know, do do something once and have it be kind of a hacky one-off,
to, to try to solve the problem in a more general sense,
it takes longer,
but then we end up with something that is more widely usable by a,
a much broader community.
I think some of the power consider fact that we have faculty,
across different universities.
Like Mike being at Boston, David being in Arizona, Ankur Desai,
who's not here, he is at Wisconsin.
I think those are the three. And Shawn being at Brookhaven now,
I think having this,
this wide distributed group of people gives us
reach to a lot more students as well,
and gives us access to,
like Mike will ask his students to work with PEcAn on when he,
they're doing some of his projects, right? And Ankur does the same.
Shawn does the same, right?
So having that ability where the faculty are spread around,
work with students that basically start contributing back some of her
dissertations back into PEcAn, I think makes it really powerful,
and makes it also that it, like there's a lot of people working on it.
And then like those students leave and start working somewhere else.
Right now we have somebody working in Finland that contributes back to it.
We have working somebody in Notre Dame that contributes back to it.
NASA is contributing back somewhat to it as well, right?
So having this sort of like growing network of people
that worked with PEcAn, learned about it, contributed their,
their research to it, hopefully enjoyed working with it.
and then basically,
like the best case scenario is where they become a faculty and say, Hey,
I have this amazing tool that we can work with that might make your life a lot
easier, and their graduate students start working at it.
And so I sort of this sort of branching tree that basically grew out from
the work that David and and Mike really started, I think at Illinois.
And I think that to me is, is really powerful.
And I think that's where a lot of the modules,
a lot of the contributions come from. And I think that is what makes it grow.
I think that is also what Google really likes.
Like I think the part of the reason why we get so much from,
like the 6, 7, 8 years from Google now is that like we've shown that it's not
just a university doing this. It's,
it's a large group of people across the world doing it.
Students are excited about working on it that we get.
And so I think that to me is, is really powerful,
The PEcAn project in the R-Universe.
And I think one of the reasons that we are,
leads to be,
using rOpenSci as part of our,
development process now is that, you know, as Mike said,
we're up to 40 some R packages that all get built
as part of the, the PEcAn system.
And those all have to talk to each other in various ways. And, you know,
some of those packages are things like the template that other
people use to adapt to build a new, to integrate a new model. And,
there are some other packages that are increasingly like the scaffolding that
you build new modules on top of.
And it becomes very quickly a very thorny integration problem,
which, we were managing by building a lot of our own tools,
where have been relying very heavily on
GitHub actions to, you know,
test all of the new contributions and to make sure that the pieces are working
together in concert and that works.
But it's a lot of maintenance time building those
tools that are really, you know, a lot of the,
rOpenSci ecosystem has sort of built that,
built many of those tools already,
and we don't need to be reinventing the wheel and trying to maintain our own
versions of them.
What are kind of the core packages we call like PEcAn base,
PEcAn database connection, the utils,
which is just a collection for a lot of handy things.
And then we've got the data packages or the modules,
actually the modules include,
packages for managing data and also packages for doing statistical
analyses on the inputs and outputs of the, of the models.
And then we've got a set of models that, I mean,
a set of packages like one package, as Mike was saying,
per model that manages a couplers, effectively saying,
you know, given this standard PEcAn input, I mean would, you know,
set of data like convert it to what that particular model wants to see
It can be, you know, converting the format, converting the variables, etcetera,
writing out configuration files,
writing out launchers scripts that run the models on a, you know,
a remote computer. And, and then at, you know,
so we've got the ones that con that, that convert the data to the inputs.
And then we've got, like,
all the models have their own unique outputs for the most part.
And so converting those into a, a common format. And in that way, you know, the,
the statistical analyses can be performed on the same, you know,
types of data
I want to highlight, because it's very evident in this view, the,
the number of dependencies that get pulled in by all of these packages.
And from an engineering standpoint, that's terrifying.
But I think it highlights what PEcAn is very good at is
the reason there are, what was it, 140 dependencies for data dot atmosphere,
is that what it does is it provides a unified framework for
downloading climate data from what,
10 different sources that arrives in, you know, some of it's in hdf,
some of it's grip files, some of it's raw JSON stream,
some of it's a thread server. And,
and we can take that and I'll turn it all into one format that
then you can take as many models as you have set up and run the same data
set through all of them without having to
fight with each of those data sources separately.
And that package also handles things like gap filling and down scaling and
de-biasing and a whole bunch of other utilities,
not just the download and processing, but one of the,
I one of the ideas that's like, you bring everything into one standard and then,
any operations we want to do on that are now scalable because they now operate
on everything in one standard format.
And then each of the model packages has a way of converting that standard into
what that specific model needs,
and so data atmosphere is organized around, yeah,
the MET data data.land is organized around the vegetation and soils data.
Data remote is organized around remotely since data streams. So,
that, that naming pattern is pretty consistent.
The PEcAn data are a lot of our ingest pipelines, and I think those,
like Chris is, they have a potential fairly broad use.
It was also part of the reason why our universe was like so super helpful is
because at least when I started,
so I'm one of the newer people to start on this, it was sort of like, yeah,
this discussion of like, well,
eventually stuff's gonna get broken out into separate repositories,
but it's gonna be a lot of work.
And because all these packages depend on each other,
and it's gonna make installing PEcAn an absolute nightmare, you know,
more difficult than it already is. And so R-Universe was like,
to me a little bit was like a, you know, a nice in between,
like it's possible to just install PEcAn with install dot
packages, when it's on R-Universe. And, and even though they're,
they're in this monorepo.